# Internationalization

SailCMS supports i18n out of the box and uses yaml files to set it's localized strings. Using yaml makes it easy for non-developers to change the files without breaking anything (unlike json or php code).

The API for i18n is pretty simple. You can get/set current locale, translate a string.

To set the current locale you can use the `setCurrent` method, by doing this, if the second argument is not set or set to `false` the method will change the loaded strings file to the set locale strings file. You can skip the reload by setting the `skipReload` argument to `true`.

```php
Locale::setCurrent('en'); // triggers a strings reload
Locale::setCurrent('en', true); // Changes locale, skips reloading
```

If anywhere in your code you wish to check what locale is active, simply use the `current` method.

```php
echo Locale::current(); // prints 'en'
```

To set the default locale of the CMS, there is 2 ways to do that. You can simply edit your `sites.php` file and set it in your site's `defaultLocale` key..

```php
return [
    'default' => [
        'locales' => ['fr', 'en'], // supported locales for content
        'defaultLocale' => 'en', // default locale
        'urls' => ['*'] // urls that are flag as being this site
    ]
];
```
or you can set it in code by using the `setDefault` method.

```php
Locale::setDefault('en');
```

If anywhere in your code you need to know the default locale of the CMS, you can use the `default` method.

```php
echo Locale::default(); // prints 'en'
```
You can also ask for the list of supported locales by using the `getAvailableLocales` method.

```php
print_r(Locale::getAvailableLocales());
// prints ['en', 'fr'] 
```

## Translating strings

There is a few ways you can do this. The official method is `translate` but we have made some shortcuts available like `t`, `_` and `_e`. But it's important to note that they process your request differently.

To get a translation, you can give path. so take this locale file for example:

```yaml
homepage:
	title: My Homepage
```

You can fetch it using dot notation.

```php
_e('homepage.title'); // prints "My Homepage"
```

### t, _
These to return the translated string to you. They are named to resemble the way vue's and svelte's i18n plugins do.

### _e
This one outputs the translated string using `echo`.

## Translating in Twig

In Twig, you can simply use the bundled `__`, `_` and `t` functions within twig.

```twig
{{ t('homepage.title') }}
```